Before we get to the command line stuff,
we need to understand the Compose file format.
Let's go over a few things and look at an example.
First is that what we're talking about here is a Compose
file format. It's written in YAML that we'll talk about the
standard of that
in a second. This is really specific to Compose
and other Dockor tools like Docker Swarm,
Docker Enterprise Edition.
Those tools all support this Compose file format,
but it may look similar to other things like Kubernetes
service definitions, and stuff like that,
and it's not. It's totally a unique thing to Compose.
It may look similar to other things.
Second, the Compose file format is really designed
to describe one or more containers
and all the different settings you might set for running
that container.
In Compose, it's called a service.
It's called the service because you can run multiple
containers,
or replicas,
under that same service. So,
in case you want to run multiple web apps of the same
image, you can just create multiple replicas.
Those are underneath what's called a service.
You'll see that in a minute. Compose is good for many other
things,
including documenting your networks that you want to
create,
putting in the volumes, and all the other settings that
revolve around
this container, or set of containers,
that you want to create. As we'll see throughout this
course,
there are lots of other things that this Compose YAML can
do.
As we tend to get more advanced later on,
we'll see things like using multiple YAML
files and combining them together to get an output
using templates known as YAML templating,
and environment variables,
and more. Just you know,
we'll be using docker-compose.yml
as the standard, or the default really,
for our Compose files. But, you can use any name you want.
You can just specify it manually during your Docker Compose
commands, but it's way easier to just use a default
out-of-the-box
and stick with that until you need more advanced setups
where we create multiple types of Compose files.
Your Compose files are going to be made using the YAML
specification,
which stands for YAML Ain't Markup Language,
which is kind of silly.
It's actually a recursive acronym,
which means that it has its own acronym name in the
acronym itself.
People have said it used to stand for Yet Another Markup
Language
but supposedly that was either never the case,
or changed at some point. Anyway,
it doesn't really matter. We call it YAML.
It's used with Docker command lines for Swarm
and Kubernetes. It's used with Kubernetes itself
and allow the Kubernetes tools.
It's used by Amazon
and just so many tools in the industry as a data
serialization language.
That really just means that it's a way for us to describe
data
in simple values,
that is then serialized and sent on to some other system
where
it's processed. Really,
YAML is the means to an end.
It's the way we describe something
and get it to the format that the computer can read it.
The nice thing about YAML, unlike some other formats like
XML, or SOAP,
or even JSON, is that YAML is easy for humans to
read.
That's one of its primary goals.
You'll notice that right away as we start to use it.
The two big concepts here I want to make sure you
understand are
the colon and the dash.
So any time you see a colon,
that indicates a key value pair.
Sometimes that value may be other key value pairs
or even a subset of information below it.
We don't use tabs for indentation. We use spaces.
I mostly will be using two spaces because I think
that's just shorter and a little easier to read,
but you may see me use four at times.
It really doesn't matter. Certain files are in four,
and certain are in two. There's no sort of set industry
standard.
Anytime you see a list,
and a list really is a single value,
there's no key value.
It's just list of values,
you'll see us using a dash.
If you open up the entire repository
and then go into the sample01 directory,
you'll see a really basic example of a node.js
app with a Compose file
and a Dockerfile. In most cases,
you're going to need that Dockerfile obviously,
but for now I want to just focus on the Compose file,
which we have set at version 2.0.
In a minute, I'll explain the difference between 2
and 3. You'll see here that we have one service,
and we can call it whatever we want.
Some people might call it node.
I would call it web, if it's a web frontend.
Or API, if it's a Web API.
Doesn't really matter.
That's how you'll be referring to this container,
or set of containers, when you're using a Docker Compose
command line.
You'll notice that we have a great example on line 1
of a key value,
with the colon,
and then you'll see under here,
we have key values that are a
subset of other keys.
Technically, all of this is part of the value
for services,
and we create a hierarchy here
with our tabs.
Under services, you can have many services.
Again, when you think of a service,
you think one or more containers based on a single image.
That's really what a service is.
We're specifing the image we want it to make when we build
this directory. That's what the dot inside the build means
is,
build an image from this directory,
is sort of shorthand for the current working directory.
Then the ports is a list,
because we can have many ports exposed.
Rather than there being a key
and value for each one,
we just make it a list of entries that are then processed
by the Docker Engine.
Lastly, real quick, before we move on to the command line
stuff,
let's talk about the versions of Compose files.
And there's a little bit of confusion in the industry.
I'm actually working with the Docker team,
right now, while this course is being built,
to kind of help clear this up.
There's Version 2 and there's Version 3 of the Compose
file.
Most common knowledge believes that the Version 3
is the complete replacement for Version 2,
and that we should all be using Version 3 from now on.
That's not really true.
I'm here to tell you that if you're just focusing on Docker
Compose
for local dev and test,
and you're not planning on using either the Swarm
orchestrator on a server
or using the Docker Enterprise Edition
with a Kubernetes cluster,
then there's no reason to use the V3.
Because really, the V3 is focused on multi-node server
orchestration features,
such as secrets and configs,
and deploying to an orchestrator type of concepts.
Version 2 was really focused on the single node using
the node you're on
with a development workflow.
It has some unique features that are not found in V3 that
we'll talk about later in this course.
For most cases, when we start out through this course,
you'll see me focusing on V2
and then whenever we get to any V3 stuff,
I'll specifically call out why we're doing that.